# Xsuite Container Repository

This repository provides Docker/Podman container definitions to create consistent tutorial environments for Jupyter notebooks used in xsuite workshops and tutorials.

**Purpose:** Provide a repeatable, cross-platform container that ships a conda-based `xsuite` environment and can be run interactively to host Jupyter Lab sessions for tutorials.

## Prerequisites
- Install Podman or Docker. Podman is recommended for preserving user permissions.
- For multi-arch builds, enable QEMU / buildx (see examples below).

## Run Jupyter Notebooks inside container
Pull the container from the GitHub Container Repository (GHCR) using:
```bash
podman pull ghcr.io/ekatralis/xsuite-containers:latest
```
### Linux 
When running `podman` on Linux, we must first determine whether we are running in rootless mode
```bash
podman info --format '{{.Host.Security.Rootless}}'
```
If this command returns `true` then we podman is running in `rootless` mode. If it returns `false`, podman is running in `rootful` mode. Depending on the mode, a different command needs to be used to preserve permissions inside the container.

For `rootless` run the container using:
```bash
podman run --rm -it --userns=keep-id --user $(id -u):$(id -g) --group-add 2020 -p 8888:8888   -v /PATH/TO/NOTEBOOKS:/workspace  ghcr.io/ekatralis/xsuite-containers:latest   bash -lc 'jupyter lab --ip=0.0.0.0 --no-browser --notebook-dir=/workspace'
```
We run as our own user inside the container to avoid permission issues caused by files generated by working inside the container and add the container user groud to enable read/write access to the container's file system.
For `rootful` mode, run the container using
```bash
podman run --rm --user $(id -u):$(id -g) --group-add 2020 -it -p 8888:8888   -v /PATH/TO/NOTEBOOKS:/workspace  ghcr.io/ekatralis/xsuite-containers:latest   bash -lc 'jupyter lab --ip=0.0.0.0 --no-browser --notebook-dir=/workspace'
```
For `Docker` the command is:
```bash
podman run --rm --user $(id -u):$(id -g) --group-add 2020 -e HOME=/home/xsuiteuser/ -it -p 8888:8888   -v /PATH/TO/NOTEBOOKS:/workspace  ghcr.io/ekatralis/xsuite-containers:latest   bash -lc 'jupyter lab --ip=0.0.0.0 --no-browser --notebook-dir=/workspace'
```
### macOS
On macOS, `podman` runs a Linux VM where podman is running in `rootful` mode. So in this case the command is shared between `Docker` and `podman` and is the following:
```bash
podman run --rm -it --user $(id -u):$(id -g) --group-add 2020  -p 8888:8888  -v  /PATH/TO/NOTEBOOKS:/workspace  ghcr.io/ekatralis/xsuite-containers:latest   bash -lc 'jupyter lab --ip=0.0.0.0 --no-browser --notebook-dir=/workspace'
```
We run as our own user inside the container and add the container user groud to enable read/write access to the container's file system.

### Windows 
On Windows, `podman` runs a Linux VM where podman is running in `rootful` mode. So in this case the command is shared between `Docker` and `podman` and is the following:
```bash
podman run --rm -it -p 8888:8888   -v /PATH/TO/NOTEBOOKS:/workspace  ghcr.io/ekatralis/xsuite-containers:latest   bash -lc 'jupyter lab --ip=0.0.0.0 --no-browser --notebook-dir=/workspace'
```
Windows files are mounted with more relaxed permissions, so we can run as `xsuiteuser` inside the container.
## Build (local)
Use the `podman build` command to build locally for your machine:
```bash
podman build --arch $(uname -m) -t xsuite-test-build Dockerfile.{full,lite} #Select which version to build
```
On Windows systems or if you want to build for a specific architecture you can set the `--arch` flag to `arm64` or `amd64` manually.

## Considerations
When building containers there is a clear tradeoff between image size and included packages/dependencies. As such, the correct way forward is to split the containers into two versions:
- A full version (`Dockerfile.full`) which is intended for running notebooks/simulations locally and includes a full jupyter environment as well as added packages for data analysis etc. This image is currently 1.62GB uncompressed.
    - This package is currently built with the intention to be (somewhat) expandable, as such it includes a `micromamba` installation and environment for installing packages from both python and conda-forge. The `micromamba` installation is minimal and doesn't add much weight to the final image.
- A lite version (`Dockerfile.lite`) which is intended for running simulations in batch systems, such as HTCondor. This version includes the bare minimum packages for running xsuite simulations and is much smaller. Current size is 901MB uncompressed.
    - This version implements a multi-stage build using `miniforge3` and then extracting a single environment in the final build. The final image doesn't bundle conda so only python packages can be installed.

> **_NOTE:_**  The multi-stage build is not strictly required if we switch that image to `micromamba` as well. Using the full `micromamba` toolkit only really adds ~15MB to the container. My current idea is to intentionally keep it this way, as the lite image is generally intended to be used as-is for simply running simulations. Also avoids having to add the auto-activation of the micromamba environment in bash which should make it marginally more lightweight.


## Run on LxPlus
In order for the containers to function correctly in rootless podman in LxPlus, you must first run the following command:
Run
```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/containers

cat > ~/.config/containers/containers.conf <<'EOF'
[containers]
default_sysctls = []
EOF
```

## Developing using DevContainers
Using this container to develop is really simple. Inside your repository, you can define the file:
```text
.devcontainer/devcontainer.json
```
And inside it add the following entry:
```json
{
    "image": "ghcr.io/ekatralis/xsuite-containers:latest"
}
```